in one of my earlier videos I've talked
about a mo fatty
I'm a fatty means love of fate and is a
concept in stoic philosophy but also in
the works of Nietzsche
the idea is to love and embrace whatever
the outcome is no matter how hard we
work towards a certain goal this way we
detach ourselves from possible results
which enhances the ability to focus on
the task at hand and take away the
anxiety that we may have concerning the
future the next question is of course
how can we do this in this video I
explore four ways to practice mo fatty
first of all Thank You Judith and thank
you Neil for your generous PayPal
donation I appreciate it very much
I'm also very happy with a lot of new
patreon supporters Thank You Martin
Joshua Hari
Nicole John Gabey Christopher Mark Paul
Kay Paul D Andrea and whimper like I
said it's a lot and your help is very
much appreciated now let's dive in love
of fate the concept is simple
implementing it is more difficult
because most Minds drift off to the
future very easily and begin to
fantasize about things that might happen
when we are restless because of the
future
we either desire or averse a certain
outcome when we desire a certain outcome
the idea of not getting it makes us
anxious when we averse a certain outcome
the idea of anchoring it makes us
anxious thus it's the attachment to
outcomes that creates the turmoil in our
minds to solve this
Epictetus argues that we should remove
desire and aversion in regards to things
that are not in our control I quote if
you desire any of the things which are
not in your own control
you must necessarily be disappointed and
of those which are and which it would be
laudable to desire nothing is yet in
your possession only use the appropriate
actions of pursuit and avoidance and
even these lightly and with gentleness
and reservation and quote now this is
easier said than done
the Stoics believe that humans are
naturally inclined to look for things
that enhance their lives and avoid
things that don't for example
we naturally look for wealth healthy
food friendship companionship etc the
Stoics call these things indifference
that consist of preferred and dis
preferred indifference so it's
understandable that the prospect of
losing or not obtaining certain
preferred indifference creates anxiety
the Stoics say however that these
external factors
are not necessary to be happy which is
great news because they are not in our
control so there would be very
unreliable sources of happiness
nevertheless many people worry endlessly
about the future in order to reduce this
maelstrom of anxious thoughts trying to
control the outcome is pointless because
we can't what we can control however is
the position we take towards the outcome
which the following four ways will be
about one purposefully expose yourself
to the thing you averse oftentimes the
things we averse are not as bad as we
imagined them many people dread the idea
of poverty for example which isn't so
strange because in current society we
are constantly told that being poor is a
terrible thing
someone fearing poverty might ask
oneself how can I possibly live without
a four bedroom house a car of a certain
brand two vacations a year eating in a
restaurant at least once a week and so
on
the key to reduce the fear of certain
outcomes is to actually expose ourselves
to them see we experience that a
perceived negative outcome is not so bad
this way we become familiar with
hardship and thus prepared for it
stoic philosopher Seneca had a nice
quote about this it is precisely in
times of immunity from care that the
soul shoots off in itself beforehand for
occasions of greater stress and it is
well for junus kind that it should
fortify itself against her violence and
quote the Stoics figured out that we do
not need all these external things to be
happy happiness comes down to our own
actions so when you fear poverty how
about living like a poor person for a
number of days in order to discover that
being poor isn't so bad as we think
another common fear is the fear of being
single and alone when you are afraid of
this how about saying no to
relationships for a while and try to
rely on yourself for happiness once we
find out that being single actually can
be a great thing we stop the fear of
being alone
once we are in a relationship this also
prevents us from staying in abusive
relationships so we can take steps into
the direction we want without fearing
the consequences to see change as an
opportunity when I look back at life I
have seen that many things I feared
actually came true
I have lost jobs I've been kicked out of
school a few times I've lost
relationships friends and many
opportunities at the same time I also
got other things in return as if life
always tries to balance itself out after
I finished college I was not able to
find a job because of the financial
crisis the worst case scenario happened
I had to work several simple jobs that
were not what I wanted to do when I look
back the experiences I had during these
years were absolutely life-changing I
was able to do things and develop myself
in certain ways that I would never have
done if my life turned out as I had
previously hoped and I'm happy things
happened as they happened here's a quote
by epictetus don't demand that things
happen as you wish but wish that they
happen as they do happen and you will go
on well and quote yes we fear losing our
jobs losing our marriage losing our
money but new situations no matter how
dreadful always have new opportunities
hidden in them in his meditations Marcus
Aurelius states that we should look for
and I quote constant awareness that
everything is born from change the
knowledge that there's nothing nature
loves more than to alter what exists and
make new things like it all that exists
is the seed of what will emerge from it
and quote three realize that happiness
is relative in one of my earliest videos
I've discussed how happiness is adaptive
in 1978 there was a study by Brickman
Coates and Jan of Bullman who wanted to
find out if happiness is relative in
order to find it out
they studied a group of lottery winners
a group of paralyzed accident victims
a control group of course we would
expect that the lottery winner is much
happier and someone who ended up
paralyzed by an accident and we also
would expect that lottery winners are
much happier than the control group that
didn't win the lottery but weren't
paralyzed either in the first weeks or
so this was indeed the case but one year
later the controls and the lottery
winners were equally happy and only
slightly happier than the paralyzed
accident victims
so if happiness is relative why should
we fear the future the time and energy
we spent on fearing the future is most
likely worse than the future itself last
year my uncle was diagnosed with cancer
at this moment he has been given up by
the doctors which means that he might
not see the new year when I visited him
recently he told me that he feels
fantastic he enjoys life to the fullest
and is grateful for every day that is
given to him so whatever tragedy happens
we know that the new circumstances never
exclude a sense of happiness and
well-being
moreover we might unexpectedly feel even
better than before
in the face of hardship for be present
now the ways I've listed so far all have
one thing in common they point out that
whatever happens we will cope with the
new circumstances that we need the
external things associated with our
current life situation to be happy is an
illusion happiness is relative as well
as unhappiness the future is just
another path not good not bad only if
the mind makes it so change is the very
essence of life resisting change is like
resisting life as soon as we resist
change we're already in the future
because instead of accepting the present
moment we try to preserve it for the
days to come
furthermore we can't say that there's no
future nor is there a past
there's only now when fate comes it
comes in a present
that's why embracing fate can
be done in the present moment so when
the future hasn't arrived yet why worry
about it but when it comes love it as
it's here love it before it's gone
because if you don't you might regret
that you didn't enjoy the moment when it
was right before you amor fati is the
art of embracing whatever happens and
not needing a single day beyond the
present as Seneca wrote about Epicurus
who was tortured by painful diseases and
said today and another day have been the
happiest of all thank you for watching
[Music]
you